
# Methylation and Tags

During the alignment process using pbmm2, methylation, and other tags are linked from the unaligned to the alignment BAM file. The specific tags may vary depending on the method used to generate the data. Here is a definition of these tags.

## Fiber-seq

Fiber-seq<sup><sub>1</sub></sup> is a chromatin mapping technique that employs methyltransferases to mark accessible adenines in DNA with methyl groups. The chromatin structure (e.g., nucleosomes and bound transcription factors) is used as a "stencil" for the methyltransferase, mapping the structure of chromatin fibers onto the underlying DNA template. The position of the methylated adenines is then used to infer the DNA accessibility from the template, offering high-resolution insights into chromatin structure at nearly single-molecule level.

Raw PacBio HiFi data are processed through [fibertools-rs](https://github.com/fiberseq/fibertools-rs) to generate unaligned BAM files. fibertools-rs adds additional information to the files creating tags that are linked by pbmm2 during alignment.

Fiber-seq generates the following tags:

- **MM (mCpG and m6A Methylation Positions):** Positions of mCpG and m6A methylation along the read.
- **ML (Methylation Precision Values):** Precision values for each mCpG and m6A methylation call.
- **ns (Nucleosome Start Positions):** Start positions of identified nucleosomes along the read relative to the first base.
- **nl (Nucleosome Lengths):** Lengths of each nucleosome along the read.
- **as (Methyltransferase Accessible Patch Start Positions):** Start positions of identified methyltransferase accessible patches (MSP) along the read.
- **al (MSP Lengths):** Lengths of each MSP along the read.

<sub>References</sub>

<sub><b>1</b>: *Andrew B. Stergachis et al.* Single-molecule regulatory architectures captured by chromatin fiber sequencing. *Science 368, 1449-1454(2020).* doi: 10.1126/science.aaz1646.</sub>

---

<!-- This section relies on the html links generated by GitHub Pages 
and will not render correctly in Markdown -->
<div style="text-align: right">
    <a href="/pipelines-docs/"> Home </a> -
    <a href="0_Overview.html"> Overview </a> -
    <a href="1_Alignment.html"> Alignment </a> -
    <a href="2_Read_Groups.html"> Read Groups </a> -
    <a> <b> Methylation and Tags </b> </a>
</div>