
# Long-Read Variant Calling

The pipeline detects candidate single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) from long-read sequencing data using longcallD. PacBio HiFi data is processed when available to complement variants detected from short-read sequencing.

All sequencing libraries associated with a tissue sample are merged prior to variant calling and processed jointly.

## longcallD Variant Calling

##### Run longcallD

```text
longcallD call -s \
  -n sample \
  --hifi \
  -o output.vcf \
  -T mei_reference.fasta \
  reference.fasta \
  sample.cram
```

Arguments:

- *-s*: call low-allele-fraction somatic/mosaic variants.
- *-\-hifi*: use the PacBio HiFi sequencing model.

##### Mobile Element Insertion Reference

longcallD requires an additional reference FASTA (`-T`) used to detect mobile element insertions (MEI). For additional details and to download the MEI reference file (`AluY_L1_SVA_cons_noPA.fa`), please refer to the developer repository [here](https://github.com/yangao07/longcallD/blob/main/anno/).

##### Multiple Input Files

The pipeline supports the inclusion of multiple CRAM files during variant calling. Additional CRAM files can be provided using the `-X` option and are processed jointly with the primary CRAM during variant calling.

## Software Version

The pipeline uses longcallD version 0.0.8.

---

<!-- This section relies on the html links generated by GitHub Pages 
and will not render correctly in Markdown -->
<div style="text-align: right">
    <a href="/pipelines-docs/"> Home </a> -
    <a href="0_Overview.html"> Overview </a> -
    <a href="1_Short_Read_Calling.html"> Short-Read Calling </a> -
    <a> <b> Long-Read Calling </b> </a> -
    <a href="3_Calls_Merging.html"> Calls Merging </a> -
    <a href="4_Filtering.html"> Filtering </a> -
    <a href="5_Cross_Validation.html"> Cross-Technology Validation </a> -
    <a href="6_Donor_Level_Refinement.html"> Donor-Level Refinement </a> -
    <a href="7_Confidence_Designation.html"> Confidence Designation </a>
</div>